hello maths fans dr tom crawford here at
the university of
oxford and today we are once again
talking about disease modeling
in the context of the covid19 pandemic
my previous videos on this topic have
been based around the sir model
which gives a set of differential
equations that can be used to try to
predict the effects
a disease outbreak will have on a
population
now of course many things have changed
since i release those original videos
with one of the more recent developments
being the availability
of a covid19 vaccine
so we can now ask ourselves the question
how
does the availability of a vaccine
affect the conclusions that we can draw
from the sir model in order to answer
this question
i've actually recruited a little bit of
help hiya
i'm gabriel i'm a particle physics
d-phil student and in my work in physics
we try to build models to understand how
and why the universe works
now after watching one of tom's videos i
learned about the s-i-r model
and i thought well what would happen if
we tried to introduce
vaccines into this model three questions
that i'm interested in are
number one well what's the condition for
an epidemic to stop number two how many
people
do we need to vaccinate in order to get
there and number three
if a vaccine is not a hundred percent
effective how does that
change the equation so i actually looked
at the first question gabriel's
mentioned
about stopping the virus transmission
in the first sar model video what we saw
there
was the di by dt
equation so the rate of change
of a number of effectives which we had
was equal
to this expression i times
rs minus s
we saw that for the transmission to stop
this rate of change has to be negative
so the number of people with the disease
must be decreasing
so it can go down to zero pandering
stops
sounds good so for that to be negative
we found that that means this thing must
be negative
which we arranged to give us
r s over a was less than
one and then we defined this
to be this parameter capital r
so this is the the r number that we're
always hearing about on the news
exactly yes so this is why
it's talked about as you said in the
news for r to be less than one
for the pandemic to stop and the disease
spread to stop
so how is this going to be affected
by vaccines well you see tom
just by looking at this definition of
the r number you can see that there are
three ways in which the r can be reduced
right so that because there are three
three letters or three parameters here
which kind of we can control right one
over a
tells us how long somebody is contagious
for
so the longer someone is sick then the
larger one over a would be
right and we can try to control that
with
better medication to get people uh
healthier
sooner or to keep them quarantined and
things like that
are is the rates that
infected people pass the disease on to
susceptible people
and we've been doing a really good job
of
keeping that down by all the lockdowns
and the social distancing things that
have been going on
but those uh i think you would agree
with me that those aren't very
sustainable yeah
how could we don't have to say and look
down yes
so really what we would like to do is to
try to get
s the number of susceptible people down
so that when we return to normal life
and go to our jobs and go to
our schools and see our families that we
won't
risk the epidemic blowing up again and
that's where vaccines come in because
vaccines
can effectively reduce s such that the r
stays below one even if we go back to
normal life how many people do we
actually
have to vaccinate to make this kind of
come true like can you quantify
the amount of vaccinations we need to do
to reduce
s sufficiently yes yes in fact we can
and we can do it simply from from this
expression here
so there was a number floating around at
the start
called r naught which is the basic
reproduction number right
yes which is the r uh
s over a uh where this you have an s
naught an initial
susceptible population so this is right
at the very beginning
of the pandora exactly so that's what
right okay right yeah
initially because it's a new disease
nobody's ever had it before
nobody has immunity so s naught would be
one
yes so that means everyone's susceptible
right anyone in the population
could possibly catch this exactly gotcha
and so so if we just write that as one
so r over a and this was approximated to
be
maybe about three yeah at the start of
the pandemic so about
three so if we want to get back to
normal life we can sort of plug this in
to this equation here right so we want
uh r over s
s star let's say which is the number of
people who are still susceptible after
vaccination
yeah so r s star over a is
less than one like that and then
we do simple rearranging less than
a over r which is less than
one-third which means so one-third of
the people would still be susceptible
after vaccination yeah which means we
need to vaccinate
two-thirds of the population so the the
three
here is obviously coming from the r
naught value yeah
that you've picked of course there's a
lot of uncertainty
around the r value for for covid
yeah so is there a way of writing down
the the number of vaccinations required
for a general arnold
uh yeah in fact it's it's pretty easy so
instead of putting in the three here
you just keep keep it as
are not and that's just based on our
note being r of a yeah okay exactly
yeah so let's say um we want the
people who are uh still susceptible
after
your vaccination program plus the people
who are vaccinated would be
one yeah so you're either vaccinated or
you're not
exactly yeah yeah and then so we can
rearrange this
to do v equals one minus
s star and then substituting this
inequality
s star less than one of r naught you
would get
uh you need to vaccinate at least one
minus one over r naught
of the population in order to stop the
epidemic
so that's exactly where the two thirds
came from then isn't it
in the expression you had here so when
arnold was three
we needed s star less than one third so
that means
less than one-third of the population
was still susceptible
i.e we vaccinated more than
one minus one-third so we vaccinated
more than two-thirds
exactly and then if you were a bit more
pessimistic you know
with the uncertainty on the r naught or
whatever yeah and you thought okay maybe
r naught is four
then you would have to vaccinate at
least one minus
one over four at least three quarters of
the population
i see so the larger r naught is the more
you vaccinate
exactly now am i correct in assuming
that here you're assuming that the
vaccine is 100 effective
yes exactly so what happens
if the vaccine isn't 100 effective how
is that going to modify
our number of vaccinations required
right so this changes the the equation
the inequality slightly
so actually this kind of sort of stays
the same
except we add a little f here
standing for the proportion of people
who have been effectively vaccinated
against the disease and that stays the
same it still has to be one s minus one
over r naught yeah but then how do you
get this
this number and that is very simple
that's just
the proportion of people effectively
vaccinated would be
the effectiveness of the vaccine yeah
times the proportion
vaccinated so if you had 100 people
vaccinated
and then and you had a 95 effective
vaccine then
95 of those 100 would be vaccinated
effectively and so e there would be 0.95
exactly it's a number between zero and
one where one is
works every time yes 100 percent
effectiveness
and then 0.95 would represent 95
exactly yeah and then we can rearrange
the
rearrange combine to get uh vaccinate
at least one over e times
one minus one over
are not so have you got some numbers for
us then
right so let's say that uh r naught was
three right so for 100 effective vaccine
we need to vaccinate two thirds of the
population
67 now if we had if we took some of the
numbers of the
currently available code vaccines let's
say we took
one that is 95 effective yeah right so
you plug in
0.95 here and that would mean that we
vaccinate
70 of the population okay so that's just
a little bit more than 67
and it's quite doable yeah um but if we
took
another vaccine that was maybe less
effective 79
so you plug in 0.79 here then you need
to vaccinate
about 80 of the population it's nice to
have the exact numbers but i think the
overall picture here is still saying
that generally the more people we
vaccinate
regardless of the effectiveness is going
to help
in terms of bringing down the r number
absolutely so at the start of this video
gabriel mentioned to us all that he was
going to address three questions
about the sir model and the covid
pandemic
now with vaccines being available
so the first question that you wanted to
address was
when will the virus transmission stop
right
and we covered that early in the video
which
where we found that the number the
proportion of people that are still
susceptible to the disease
needs to be less than
one over are not so that's
question one and then question two
was how many people do we then have to
vaccinate
for this to happen the proportion of
people that need to be vaccinated would
be 100
minus this number right so you need to
vaccinate
at least one minus one over
r naught of your population and then
finally
if the vaccine isn't 100 effective
how does that affect our calculations
right
so that then changes this
slightly so v is greater than
one over e
times one minus one over r naught so a
bit more so i think the overall message
that at least that i've learned from
from this discussion with gabriel today
has basically the importance
of vaccinations as just one
of many tools in terms of combating the
pandemic so we've seen that
that vaccinations are certainly going to
help us
to return to normal life sooner but it's
still important
to reduce r through the other measures
yes such as socially distancing
lockdowns etc thank you everyone for
watching and a huge thank you to gabriel
for sharing with us his modeling
expertise in this video
do check out his youtube channel pphd
to find out what it's like being a
particle
physicist and remember if you've enjoyed
this video
please do subscribe to my channel
tomrocksmats
stay safe out there everyone and i'll
see you all very soon
you